Arthur is a four-year-old Breton
who was sent to us from France because he was frightened of heavy traffic and tried
to run away
even when
driven with an experienced horse beside him. Other films showing the work we have done
with him can be seen on our YouTube
channel
and here we have taken him down town and
put Sam on the reins
to show that she can control him in a rubber bit
in heavy fast-moving traffic. Obviously
we cannot drive on the wrong side of the
road here
but we can do our best to recreate the
environment he will be driving in at home, i.e
on the right hand side of the road with
traffic approaching and passing on his
left.
We have also tucked the carriage
behind this road sign
which means lorries will not spot
us and slow down as they approach.
This allows us to show that Arthur is
happy with large lorries and other
traffic
passing him at speed which can often be
frightening to a horse
due to the increased noise, movement and run of air
that accompanies them. We have asked Sam to hold the reins up loose
and put her feet up on the rein rail;
this is to show that she does not have
any brakes on
and is not hanging onto Arthur to get him
to stand still. We have put Arthur as a pair
to allow Roly to share some of the
load getting into town
which enables Arthur to be fresh and
full of energy when he sees
the traffic. Exposing him to vehicles under
this circumstance
is a good test because it proves that he
will still listen to us even when he
is full of beans.
Bear in mind as well as a horse of his
body weight
would simply knock Roly off his feet
should he choose to jump sideways
if he wanted to shy at a lorry. Therefore he is free to spook or plunge forward should
he wish to
but we know that he won't because he is
not afraid of the traffic.
In olden days horses were often expected
to stand still
with no groom at their head and no driver on the reins either. The roads in cities were
often busier than this road here;
if not just with motorized vehicles
which were noisier than today's electric cars
for example
then with other turnouts passing them at speed as well
which as no doubt some people will
appreciate can be more exciting and
unsettling for a horse than lorries. It is
only the standards of horsemanship
that have changed
so here we are showing that Arthur will
stand still with no groom at his head
and while Sam has her hands of the reins too. You can sometimes see at events,
drivers holding the reins between their knees while they adjust their coats for example -
a four-in-hand driver often crouches down
to pat his wheelers quarters from the carriage
after a round
and logging horses often pull noisy loads
with no driver on the reins
but their handler walking beside them, so we are showing here that we are confident in
the work we have done with Arthur
and his confidence in us as well that he
will stand still happily in such an
environment.
Although all horses that come to us for
training
are taught to cope happily with traffic passing on their inside, with horses that come
from abroad
or will be sent to a foreign country when
they finish their training
it is especially important to prepare
them for being driven
on the other side of the road. Just as a
riding horse can be upset by someone
mounting from the wrong side
so a driving horse can be upset by seeing
traffic where they're not accustomed to.
In Arthur's case it is no good simply
getting him used to
traffic passing on his right hand side
as it does in the UK,
but we also have to teach him not to be
frightened of traffic passing on his left
side
hence why we have spent some time on
this side of the road
facing in this direction. Even if Arthur was remaining in the UK
to be driven he might still be asked to overtake a parked lorry, which would then be
on his near side.
You can see how he copes with this as a
single horse
on his other film. We have also put Sam
on the reins
to give Arthur's owner confidence that he
can be driven and controlled by another
driver,
and by someone who has less experience
than Barry. Although Arthur's driver is a
gentleman,
it shows that Arthur does not require a
strong pair of forearms to control him in
traffic.
We have also put Sam on the carriage by
herself which shows she is not relying on
a groom to help haul on the reins
or jump down and get to his head.
Although it is always a good idea to
have an extra pair of hands with you on
a carriage,
sometimes the groom may not be of any
use, so again
to show that we have confidence that Arthur will behave himself with Sam
we have asked her to take him out by
herself. He is being driven in a soft rubber
bit;
a simple snaffle, which shows that we are
not using the leverage
of a curb bit in order to control him. With
these bits a small amount
pressure applied on the reins is
magnified in the horse's mouth
and so gets the desired response even
with the driver using
only a little bit of pressure. With our snaffles,
there's no curb chain and no extra setting
for the reins
in order to increase their severity.
Therefore this shows that we have
confidence in the training we have done
with Arthur,
that Sam can control him and drive him
safely, confidently
and happily in heavy traffic by herself.
Arthur will now go back home to be driven
by his owner in France.